Welcome back to this lecture on sentence segmentation in space the basics we saw briefly how Doc objects
are divided into sentences in this lecture.
We're going to learn how sentence segmentation works and how to set our own segmentation rules to break
up Dock's into sentences based off our own rules.
Let's go ahead and check this out.
In a Jupiter notebook.
OK here I am at the notebook and right now I imported Spacey I've loaded up the English library set
and also I've created a doc object out of this string right here where I have this is the first sentence.
This is another sentence.
And then this is the last sentence.
So there's three sentences here.
And as we know from space the basics what I can do is say four sent in doc since printout sent where
Doc that sense actually separates everything into sentences.
Keep in mind that this doc dot se A.S. is actually a generator.
So if you were to try to index off of sense it would actually fail.
You'd get an error saying a generator object is not subscript will because this generates the sentences
instead of holding them all in memory.
That's a safe space because as you can imagine this document object can be huge.
So you don't want all of the saved duplicated in memory instead you can iterate through the sentences.
However for the actual document itself since it knows from the language library how to quickly look
up tokens you can easily grab individual tokens from the dock but you can't grab sentences individually
from that sense.
If you really need to do this all you need to do is just pass this into a list so you can say list thok
sense and then you gonna have a list here of the sentences they can then index off of order to grab
the sentences.
However keep in mind that if you actually look at the type here
these are going to be Spacey spand objects not just normal strings.
Now typically Spacey is really good at separating out sentences itself based off things like the start
of a sentence or the end of a sentence.
However you may have a custom dataset for sentence segmentation you want to follow your own particular
set of rules.
Maybe you want to segment's based off a semi-colon which isn't technically the stop of a sentence.
Well let's actually create a new object that is going to be a document object.
It's going to be Unicode and I'm going to use single quotes on the outside because it's going to be
kind of an interesting set of strings.
Well we're going to do is say have a little quote here like management is doing the right things.
Semi-colon leadership is doing the right things.
And then this is itself going to be a quote inside of this text.
I'm going to zoom out so you can see the effect here.
And then I'm going to attribute this for dash to Peter Drucker.
So we're going to run that.
And if we take a look at the actual text of this document.
So if I just say Doc text I can see management is doing the right things.
Semi-colon leadership's doing right things.
This first phrase is inside its own set of double quotes.
And then we see that Peter Drucker first let's see what happens with the default settings of sentence
segmentation.
If I say force sent in doc since Prince the sentence and then Prince a new line if I run that notice
it got separated out into two sentences the first one is the long quote and the second one is this dash
Peter Drucker that may be right.
That may be wrong depending on your particular use case.
So let's show you how to add a new rule to the pipeline that gets created when you wrap this in an LP.
So now we're going to do is show you basically two approaches.
One is to add a segmentation rule basically adding a new thing to segment on and the other is essentially
changed the rules entirely.
So change segmentation rules so by default you can see from previous examples if we scroll up that we
split essentially on periods and white spaces here to see the sentences.
So maybe that's not the case in which case you'll need to replace all the rules but maybe you also want
to separate on the normal separations but add in something like separating on semi-colons.
So we're going to show you first how to add a segmentation rule that will show you how to change all
the segmentation rules.
Let's first show you how to add a segmentation rule and do that we need to create a function.
We'll start off by calling our functions set custom underscore boundaries.
And is going to accept a document object and I want to show you a couple of things that we can do with
a document object.
The first thing is that every token inside a document actually retains its index position.
So for example I can say for token in documents print out token I and if we actually then run set custom
boundaries on our current documents you'll see here that every token contains its index position.
So for example I can print the token and the tokens so we can see the first set of double quotes is
0.
This management is token number one is a token number two and so on.
So we have this.
I for the index position which is going to be useful as you'll see in a second.
So what we're going to do is we'll say for tokin in doc but we're going to do some indexing here on
this doc object.
Say colon negative 1.
And the reason for that is if we actually take a look at document colon negative one this goes all the
way from the beginning up to but not including the very last token and you'll see why we have to do
that in just a second.
We're going to do is we'll go through every tokin up to and including the last one and we'll say if
tokin text is equal to and then we're going to add a new segmentation rule so we'll say if it's equal
to a semi colon Well we're going to do is say that documents at that index position plus one.
So that very next one will say is sentence are sent.
Start is equal to true.
So essentially all we're doing is we're going along through every tokin inside of this document.
And once we see a semi colon we're going to say OK you just saw a semi colon the very next word or token
after that that's going to be the start of a new sentence which is why we're saying token I plus one.
And since we're saying I plus one we only need to go up to Peter because the index of Peter plus one
is going to be his last name trucker.
So that's why we're going from the beginning all the way up to the end minus the very last word because
we're at ease this plus one.
And we want to make sure that we don't actually go past the documents.
Otherwise we'll get some index out of range here.
So again we're going through each of these tokens once we says some I call and we're going to say that
very next word such as leadership that's going to be the start of a sentence.
We'll set that attribute equal to true.
And then at the end once you're done going through for a loop we're going to return the documents so
we know how to run that.
And then you're going to call an LP and you're going to say add underscore pipe and you get a passing
custom boundaries and you're going to say before equals parser and then we can say and O.P. that pipe
underscore names and you can see here we have the tagger.
So that happens first then our custom boundaries happens the pipeline then the parser and then the named
entity recognition.
Notice that tagger parser and the recognition those all happen on the pipeline automatically.
So let's go ahead and rerun the document creation.
So before we actually get to changing segmentation rules we're going to do is create a couple more cells
here and say Doc 4.
So brand new documents in LP and we're going to copy and paste this long quote.
So copy that paste it in.
So I had this new document for and then what I'm going to do is say the following.
Four cents in doc for cents print sent.
So when you run that notice now it's separating on that semi-colon.
When I ran the original documents and asked it to print sentences it printed out the entire quote and
then Peter Drucker.
But now I've created a new pipeline set my custom boundaries inside of the pipeline and then again read
the fine documents and then you can see here it's separating on the semi colon.
So that's how you can add a segmentation rule.
So what happens if you want to change the rules completely.
So in some cases we want to replace spaces default sensitizer with our own set of rules.
So we're going to see now how the default sensitizer breaks on periods and they're going to replace
that behavior of the sense incisor to maybe break on something like line breaks.
So again we're going to say an LP is equal to space e the load and I'm reloading the English library.
So I kind of reset to the original default behavior.
Otherwise my cousin boundaries that I created here is going to be messed up.
So I've reloaded this.
Ran that line again and then we're going to create a string will say my string is a unicode string and
says this is a sentence.
This is another and we're actually going to then add in some line breaks here so I add in some line
breaks.
Add two in a row and then say this is a we'll do another line break.
We'll say third sentence.
OK.
So if I were actually prints my string here it says this is a sentence this is another.
This is a third sentence you can imagine for something like a text dataset of poetry line breaks like
this are actually more important than the periods.
And you may want to the fine line breaks themselves as the actual end of a sentence instead of what
is classically known as the end of a sentence which is a period.
So for something like approach with data set this could be really important.
Now let's see what happens if we check out the default behavior first.
We're going to say Doc is equal to an LP will pass in my string and now take a look at what the default
segmentation is will say for sentence.
And talk about sense print out the sentence.
And when we run this you'll notice that it's actually able to pick up on this double set of new lines
but it automatically separates the first.
This is a sentence from.
This is another.
And that's going to be an issue for us if we only want the new line to be the indicator of a new segment.
So maybe you really want three segments here this one this one and this one.
Instead of separating on standard segments.
So if we want to change the rules we need to call from Spacey thought pipeline import sentence segments
or and then we'll create a function that will basically tell Spacey and its pipeline what it should
be using for segmentation and we'll call this function split on we'll call it split on new lines.
It takes the documents we're going to find start at zero.
And we'll say have I seen a new line or have I seen a new separator or whatever you want your segmentation
to be and we'll start off as false and then we'll say for word in the documents
we've seen a new line then this is going to be a generator.
I will yield doc from start to the current words in the expedition and hear word you could replace it
with token if that makes more sense to you it's just a variable name.
And then we'll say the New START is equal to the word at that are the words in solution there and we'll
reset seen new line equal to false and then we'll say oh if the word text and then we're going to call
the starts with method which is just a normal method available often in Python string will say if the
word text starts with a new line then we've just seen a new line.
Set it to true and then at the end of this for loop we're going to yield
from start all the way to the end.
So do we actually doing here.
We start at zero.
We haven't seen a new line yet or a new segmentation so we'll set that equal to false.
And then for every token or word in that document if we've already seen the new line then we're going
to yield from the start up to that current tokens index will reset that current tokens index as a start
position and we'll set senior line equals to false.
Else if we actually see that that particular tokens text starts with and here backslash and you can
replace that with whatever segmentation or separator you want then we reset the new line equals to true.
So again the things that you would replace for your own segmentation are essentially whatever your indicator
is here which starts with.
And if you want you can change the variable names from senior line to seen my segments.
OK.
And then we're returning back or generating these chunks of the document.
So then what we do is we just say create a variable like a speedy and then we call sentence segment
later.
Pasand the vocab.
And then we say strategy we're basically replacing the default strategy for sentence segmentation and
then we pass in our function split on new lines and then we're going to add to the pipeline or we'll
say an LP at Pipe espie the and if you check out now when we say Doc is equal to an LP strings we need
to redefine that document.
Well now say for sentence in Doc thought sense Prince and there we're going to print out for example
the actual sentence.
So if you run this notice what happens we're saying this is a sentence this is another we are no longer
splitting by default on this is a sentence and then period another line.
This is another instead.
Now this whole thing is being treated as a single segment's.
So notice again the difference here by default Spacey was splitting on the periods.
Now we've completely overwritten the sentence segmentation rules to our own strategy where we're splitting
on new lines.
OK.
And that's it for this lecture.
Hopefully now you realize that you can use the default sentence segmentation.
You can add rules on what to segment on.
Or you can completely replace the rules if you need so.
Thanks and we'll see you at the next lecture.